# Add Document Elements with D3
## select()
select() method selects one element from the document. It takes an argument for the name of the element you want and returns an HTML node for the first element in the document that matches the name.
```js
const anchor = d3.select("a");
```
## apend()
takes an argument for the element you want to add to the document. It appends an HTML node to a selected item, and returns a handle to that node.

## text()
either sets the text of the selected node, or gets the current text. To set the value, you pass a string as an argument inside the parentheses of the method.
```js
d3.select('body').append('h1').text('Learning D3')
```
The method can take a string or a callback function as an argument:
```js
selection.text((d) => d)
```
> the parameter d refers to a single entry in the dataset that a selection is bound to.

## selectAll()
select a group of elements. It returns an array of HTML nodes for all the items in the document that match the input string.
```js
const anchors = d3.selectAll("a");

d3.selectAll('li').text('list item');
```

# Work with Data in D3

## data()
is used on a selection of DOM elements to attach the data to those elements. The data set is passed as an argument to the method.


## enter()
creates a new element in the document for each piece of data in the set.

When `enter()` is combined with the `data()` method, it looks at the selected elements from the page and compares them to the number of data items in the set. If there are fewer elements than data items, it creates the missing elements.

```js
const dataset = ["a", "b", "c"];
d3.select("ul").selectAll("li")
  .data(dataset)
  .enter()
  .append("li")
  .text("New item");
```

This code is telling D3 to first select the `ul` on the page. Next, select all `list items`, which returns an empty selection. Then the `data()` method reviews the dataset and runs the following code three times, once for each item in the array. The `enter()` method sees there are no `li` elements on the page, but it needs 3 (one for each piece of data in `dataset`). New `li` elements are appended to the `ul` and have the text `New item`.
```js
d3.select('body')
  .selectAll('h2')
  .data(dataset)
  .enter()
  .append('h2')
  .text('New Title')
```

# Work with Dynamic Data in D3

```js
const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];

d3.select("body").selectAll("h2")
  .data(dataset)
  .enter()
  .append("h2")
  .text(d => d + " USD");
```

# Add Inline Styling to Elements
## style()
add. inline CSS styles on dynamic elements. takes a comma-separated key-value pair as an argument. Here's an example to set the selection's text color to blue:
```js
selection.style('font-family','verdana')
```
You can use a callback function in the `style()` method to include conditional logic
```js
const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];

d3.select("body").selectAll("h2")
  .data(dataset)
  .enter()
  .append("h2")
  .text((d) => (d + " USD"))
  // Add your code below this line
  .style('color', d=> d<20?'red':'green')
```

# Add Classes with D3
## attr() 
works the same way that `style()` does. It takes comma-separated values, and can use a callback function. Here's an example to add a class of container to a selection:
```js
selection.attr("class", "container");
```
accepts a callback function to dynamically set that attribute. The callback function takes two arguments, one for the data point itself (usually `d`) and one for the index of the data point in the array. The second argument for the index is optional.
```js
selection.attr("property", (d, i) => { })
```

```js
const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];

d3.select("body").selectAll("div")
  .data(dataset)
  .enter()
  .append("div")
  .attr('class','bar')
```
```js
const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];

d3.select("body").selectAll("div")
  .data(dataset)
  .enter()
  .append("div")
  .attr("class", "bar")
  .style('height', d => d * 10 + 'px')
```
> creates a bar graph from the data provided

# SVG in D3
SVG is used to make common geometric shapes. Since D3 maps data into a visual representation, it uses SVG to create the shapes for the visualization. SVG shapes for a web page must go within an HTML `svg` tag.

CSS can be scalable when styles use relative units (such as `vh`, `vw`, or `% percentages`), but using SVG is more flexible to build data visualizations.

# Display Shapes with SVG
There are a number of supported shapes in SVG, such as rectangles and circles. They are used to display data. For example, a rectangle `<rect>` SVG shape could create a bar in a bar chart.

When you place a shape into the `svg` area, you can specify where it goes with `x` and `y` coordinates. The origin point of (0, 0) is in the upper-left corner. Positive values for `x` push the shape to the right, and positive values for `y` push the shape down from the origin point.
## `<rect>`
An SVG `rect` has four attributes. There are the `x` and `y` coordinates for where it is placed in the `svg` area. It also has a `height` and `width` to specify the size.
```js
const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];

const w = 500;
const h = 100;

const svg = d3.select("body")
			  .append("svg")
			  .attr("width", w)
			  .attr("height", h)
			  .append('rect') // add a rect
			  .attr('width', 25)
			  .attr('height', 100)
			  .attr('x', 0)
			  .attr('y', 0)
```

you do NOT need to write a `for` loop or use `forEach()` to iterate over the items in the data set. Recall that the `data()` method parses the data set, and any method that's chained after `data()` is run once for each item in the data set.

In SVG, the origin point for the coordinates is in the upper-left corner. An `x` coordinate of 0 places a shape on the left edge of the SVG area. A `y` coordinate of 0 places a shape on the top edge of the SVG area. Higher `x` values push the rectangle to the right. Higher `y` values push the rectangle down.

# fill

In SVG, a `rect` shape is colored with the `fill` attribute. It supports hex codes, color names, and rgb values, as well as more complex options like gradients and transparency.

# Add Labels to D3 Elements

D3 lets you label a graph element, such as a bar, using the SVG text element.

Like the rect element, a text element needs to have x and y attributes, to place it on the SVG canvas. It also needs to access the data to display those values.

# Style D3 Labels

D3 methods can add styles to the bar labels. The `fill` attribute sets the color of the text for a `text` node. The `style()` method sets CSS rules for other styles, such as `font-family` or `font-size`.

```js
const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];

const w = 500;
const h = 100;

const svg = d3.select("body")
				.append("svg")
				.attr("width", w)
				.attr("height", h);

svg.selectAll("rect")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("rect")
	.attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
	.attr("y", (d, i) => h - 3 * d)
	.attr("width", 25)
	.attr("height", (d, i) => d * 3)
	.attr("fill", "navy");

svg.selectAll("text")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("text") // add a text node
	.text((d) => d) // change the text node text to the data
	.attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
	.attr("y", (d, i) => h - (3 * d) - 3) // label 3 px above bar
	.style('font-size', '25px') // 25px size text
	.attr('fill','red') // fill of text is red
```

# Add a Hover Effect to a D3 Element

You set the CSS class on the SVG elements with the `attr()` method. Then the `:hover` pseudo-class for your new class holds the style rules for any hover effects.

# Add a Tooltip to a D3 Element

There are several ways to add a tooltip to a visualization, this challenge uses the SVG `title` element.

`title` pairs with the `text()` method to dynamically add data to the bars.
```js
svg.selectAll("rect")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("rect")
	.attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
	.attr("y", (d, i) => h - 3 * d)
	.attr("width", 25)
	.attr("height", (d, i) => d * 3)
	.attr("fill", "navy")
	.attr("class", "bar")
	// Add your code below this line
	.append('title')
	.text(d=>d)
```
>this didn't seem to work in the editor ?

# Create a Scatterplot with SVG Circles

A scatter plot is another type of visualization. It usually uses circles to map data points, which have two values each. These values tie to the `x` and `y` axes, and are used to position the circle in the visualization.

SVG has a `circle` tag to create the circle shape. It works a lot like the `rect` elements you used for the bar chart.

# Add Attributes to the Circle Elements
D3 needs more information about the position and size of each `circle` to display them correctly.
`cx` and `cy` attributes are the coordinates

The radius (`r` attribute) gives the size of the `circle`.

Just like the `rect` `y` coordinate, the `cy` attribute for a `circle` is measured from the top of the SVG canvas, not from the bottom.

All three attributes can use a callback function to set their values dynamically. Remember that all methods chained after `data(dataset)` run once per item in dataset. The `d` parameter in the callback function refers to the current item in dataset, which is an array for each point. You use bracket notation, like `d[0]`, to access the values in that array.

>should have told us that last section ffs

```js
const dataset = [
				[ 34,    78 ],
				[ 109,   280 ],
				[ 310,   120 ],
				[ 79,    411 ],
				[ 420,   220 ],
				[ 233,   145 ],
				[ 333,   96 ],
				[ 222,   333 ],
				[ 78,    320 ],
				[ 21,    123 ]
				];


const w = 500;
const h = 500;

const svg = d3.select("body")
				.append("svg")
				.attr("width", w)
				.attr("height", h);

svg.selectAll("circle")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("circle")
	.attr('cx',(d,i)=>d[0])
	.attr('cy',(d,i)=>h - d[1]) // inverted
	.attr('r', 5)
```

# Add Labels to Scatter Plot Circles
The text nodes need `x` and `y` attributes to position it on the SVG canvas
```js
svg.selectAll("circle")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("circle")
	.attr("cx", (d, i) => d[0])
	.attr("cy", (d, i) => h - d[1])
	.attr("r", 5);

svg.selectAll("text")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("text")
	// Add your code below this line
	.attr("x", (d, i) => d[0] + 5) // 5 more than circle x pos
	.attr("y", (d, i) => h - d[1])
	.text((d) => (d[0] + ", " + d[1]))
```

# Create a Linear Scale with D3
In D3, there are scales to help plot data. `scales` are functions that tell the program how to map a set of raw data points onto the pixels of the SVG canvas.

For example, say you have a 100x500-sized SVG canvas and you want to plot Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for a number of countries. The set of numbers would be in the billion or trillion-dollar range. You provide D3 a type of scale to tell it how to place the large GDP values into that 100x500-sized area.

It's unlikely you would plot raw data as-is. Before plotting it, you set the scale for your entire data set, so that the `x` and `y` values fit your canvas width and height.

D3 has several scale types. For a linear scale (usually used with quantitative data), there is the D3 method `scaleLinear()`
```js
const scale = d3.scaleLinear()
```


# Set a Domain and a Range on a Scale

By default, a scale uses the identity relationship. The value of the input is the same as the value of the output.

Say a dataset has values ranging from 50 to 480. This is the input information for a scale, also known as the *domain*.

You want to map those points along the `x` axis on the SVG canvas, between 10 units and 500 units. This is the output information, also known as the `range`.

The `domain()` and `range()` methods set these values for the scale. Both methods take an array of at least two elements as an argument. Here's an example:
```js
scale.domain([50, 480]);
scale.range([10, 500]);
scale(50)
scale(480)
scale(325)
scale(750)
d3.scaleLinear()
```
In order, the following values would be displayed in the console: `10`, `500`, `323.37`, and `807.67`.

Notice that the scale uses the linear relationship between the domain and range values to figure out what the output should be for a given number. The minimum value in the domain (`50`) maps to the minimum value (`10`) in the range.

# Use the d3.max and d3.min Functions to Find Minimum and Maximum Values in a Dataset

Often when you set the domain, you'll want to use the minimum and maximum values within the data set. D3 has two methods - `min()` and `max()` to return this information.
```js
const exampleData = [34, 234, 73, 90, 6, 52];
d3.min(exampleData)
d3.max(exampleData)
```

A dataset may have nested arrays, like the [x, y] coordinate pairs that were in the scatter plot example. In that case, you need to tell D3 how to calculate the maximum and minimum. `min()` and `max()` provide a callback to do this
```js
const locationData = [[1, 7],[6, 3],[8, 3]];
const minX = d3.min(locationData, (d) => d[0]);
```

# Use Dynamic Scales
The D3 `min()` and `max()` methods are useful to help set the scale.
```js
const w = 500;
const h = 500;

// Padding between the SVG canvas boundary and the plot
const padding = 30;

// Create an x and y scale

const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
				.domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[0])])
				.range([padding, w - padding]);

// Add your code below this line

const yScale = d3.scaleLinear()
				.domain([0, d3.max(dataset, d=>d[1])]) // domain is standard
				.range([w-padding, padding]); // range is inverted
```

# Use a Pre-Defined Scale to Place Elements

The scales are like processing functions that turn the x and y raw data into values that fit and render correctly on the SVG canvas. They keep the data within the screen's plotting area.

You set the coordinate attribute values for an SVG shape with the scaling function. This includes `x` and `y` attributes for `rect` or `text` elements, or `cx` and `cy` for `circles`. Here's an example:
```js
shape.attr("x", (d) => xScale(d[0]))
```
Scales set shape coordinate attributes to place the data points onto the SVG canvas. You don't need to apply scales when you display the actual data value, for example, in the `text()` method for a tooltip or label.
```js
const dataset = [
				[ 34,     78 ],
				[ 109,   280 ],
				[ 310,   120 ],
				[ 79,   411 ],
				[ 420,   220 ],
				[ 233,   145 ],
				[ 333,   96 ],
				[ 222,    333 ],
				[ 78,    320 ],
				[ 21,   123 ]
			];

const w = 500;
const h = 500;
const padding = 60;

const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
					.domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[0])])
					.range([padding, w - padding]);

const yScale = d3.scaleLinear()
					.domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[1])])
					.range([h - padding, padding]);

const svg = d3.select("body")
				.append("svg")
				.attr("width", w)
				.attr("height", h);

svg.selectAll("circle")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("circle")
	// Add your code below this line
	.attr('cx',d=>xScale(d[0]))
	.attr('cy',d=>yScale(d[1]))
	.attr('r', 5)
	// Add your code above this line

svg.selectAll("text")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("text")
	.text((d) =>  (d[0] + ", " + d[1]))
	// Add your code below this line
	.attr('x',d=>xScale(d[0] + 10))
	.attr('y',d=>yScale(d[1]))
```

# Add Axes to a Visualization

D3 has two methods, `axisLeft()` and `axisBottom()`, to render the y-axis and x-axis, respectively. Here's an example to create the x-axis based on the xScale in the previous challenges:
```js
const xAxis = d3.axisBottom(xScale);
```
The next step is to render the axis on the SVG canvas. To do so, you can use a general SVG component, the `g` element. The `g` stands for group. Unlike `rect`, `circle`, and `text`, an axis is just a straight line when it's rendered. Because it is a simple shape, using `g` works. The last step is to apply a `transform` attribute to position the axis on the SVG canvas in the right place. Otherwise, the line would render along the border of SVG canvas and wouldn't be visible. SVG supports different types of transforms, but positioning an axis needs translate. When it's applied to the g element, it moves the whole group over and down by the given amounts. Here's an example:
```js
const xAxis = d3.axisBottom(xScale);

svg.append("g")
   .attr("transform", "translate(0, " + (h - padding) + ")")
   .call(xAxis);
```

The above code places the x-axis at the bottom of the SVG canvas. Then it's passed as an argument to the `call()` method. The y-axis works in the same way, except the `translate` argument is in the form `(x, 0)`. Because `translate` is a string in the `attr()` method above, you can use concatenation to include variable values for its arguments.
```js
const dataset = [
				[ 34,     78 ],
				[ 109,   280 ],
				[ 310,   120 ],
				[ 79,   411 ],
				[ 420,   220 ],
				[ 233,   145 ],
				[ 333,   96 ],
				[ 222,    333 ],
				[ 78,    320 ],
				[ 21,   123 ]
			];

const w = 500;
const h = 500;
const padding = 60;

const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
					.domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[0])])
					.range([padding, w - padding]);

const yScale = d3.scaleLinear()
					.domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[1])])
					.range([h - padding, padding]);

const svg = d3.select("body")
				.append("svg")
				.attr("width", w)
				.attr("height", h);

svg.selectAll("circle")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("circle")
	.attr("cx", (d) => xScale(d[0]))
	.attr("cy",(d) => yScale(d[1]))
	.attr("r", (d) => 5);

svg.selectAll("text")
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append("text")
	.text((d) =>  (d[0] + "," + d[1]))
	.attr("x", (d) => xScale(d[0] + 10))
	.attr("y", (d) => yScale(d[1]))

const xAxis = d3.axisBottom(xScale);
// Add your code below this line
const yAxis = d3.axisLeft(yScale);
// Add your code above this line

svg.append("g")
	.attr("transform", "translate(0," + (h - padding) + ")")
	.call(xAxis);

// Add your code below this line
svg.append('g')
	.attr('transform', 'translate(' + padding + ', 0)')
	.call(yAxis)
```